well Sultan Barakat joins us here in the
studio he's a professor of public policy
at H hammad bin Khalifa University thank
you and good to see you we're talking
about the maritime Corridor that's being
opened up from Cypress to Gaza this peer
that the US Navy is going to be building
off Gaza to try and get much needed Aid
in look the first question that strikes
me
is it's interesting that we're suddenly
now focused on what's happening on a
Mediterranean island in a port called
lanica when we should be looking at
what's happening at trucks full of Aid
blocked at the Egyptian border is this
in some sense a convenient distraction
as has been alleged by the UN and others
well I think it is I think it's one of
the main purposes of making this
announcement at this particular time the
other one of course it serves uh
domestically for President Biden uh
given the pressure on him to say
something something constructive related
to Palestine particularly during the uh
State of Union Address he had hoped to
be able to present a ceasefire that
wasn't happening so this is a convenient
sort of second choice for something to
that he can offer to the Americans and
you can see from his Partners in this
project I mean it's the EU and Ora uh
what's her name ARA vond fion V Deion
yes and and the United Arab Emirate uh
and those are all sides that were very
pro Israel and suddenly now they're
trying to come up with an alternative
well I can certainly see the convenience
for all of them to line up behind this
plan because frankly they've been unable
to exercise any other plan I'm not sure
I agree that this is useful for
President Biden I know he made the
announcement in the State of the Union
Address but in a sense this is fuel to
his critics who are then able to turn
around and say look the only reason
you're doing this is because because you
weren't able or willing to exercise your
influence to get the Israelis to allow
Aid in through border crossings it is
their legal obligation to provide
humanitarian Aid in which they have been
failing to do and the US has done
nothing about it sure I think the ideal
situation would be to Stop The Killing
and uh within the UN circles they use
something called feeding the dead it's a
term that was developed during the
Bosnia war in the early 1990s where you
know 100% where the solution is the
solution is in stopping the killing and
in the case of the United States the
supply of weapons uh the intelligence
the political cover that he's been
providing for Netanyahu all of this has
led to where we are today so he knows
that is the answer but in his I think
internal domestic politics it's not all
about actually achieving the right uh
solution it's about The Vibes it's about
the message that he's sending out there
he's trying to present himself as
sympathetic with with the Palestinian
and try and win some of the American
Arab American vots but when it comes to
the practicality there has never been a
problem in crossing the Mediterranean
with aid aid has been coming to Alish
Alish is a very is is a Egyptian Port
very close to Gaza the problem is in
crossing the boundaries of Gaza that's
number one and number two is in
distributing the aid with Israel having
destroyed the infrastructure even if you
were to uh to bring the aid to a point
on the coast within Gaza you only going
to create another bottleneck there is no
way to redistribute this Aid as it
should be across the the the the strip
and of course this is what I think most
Aid agency will be agencies will be
thinking about it's not about getting it
just in it's how do you get it to the
individuals that need it most yeah and
nobody's coming up with a plan for
distribution that's I think it's a
cynical attemp well well it it has that
sort of slightly performative look about
it doesn't it and the the other big
issue of course that critics raise is
the is the risk that this serves to in a
sense legitimize the blockade because if
you can open a successful pathway or
Highway for food Aid across the sea why
do you need a highway for food Aid
across land look had this been done
under a United Nations resolution I
think would have been a positive step
towards internationalizing the conflict
in Gaza and maybe a one first step
towards uh offering International
protection to the Palestinians which
says we the International Community are
concerned therefore we have put a
coalition to break this uh blockade
against the Palestinians and we will
whatever happens we will allow food in
but unfortunately that's not what is
going on what is going on and according
to what Biden has just said in the
morning he's going to look for Israel to
a construct and B secure this floating
Port whatever he's he's thinking about
now that risks uh engaging the Israelis
uh in a double uh occupation I mean
already they are 1967 occupation of Gaza
is there now literally they are
occupying Gaza and it is their
responsibility to provide for the people
of Gaza so by allowing them again to
undertake that responsibility he is
enforcing their occupation of uh of the
land at this moment legitimizing it or
legitimizing it yes barad thanks for
your thoughts thank you